---
layout: post
title: "Working on some blogging software"
summary: ""
---

As I'm sure no one has noticed, I've started replacing the blogging software I use for this blog. The reasons for doing this, and the reasons for the chosen technology involved and the process of doing it, are mostly that same as ever: because I felt like it.

Specifically, I would like to have a commenting system on this blog, a self-written one. I think that would be fun to play with. For a while, I contemplated staying with the same solution – i.e., HTML pages statically generated by [Jekyll](https://jekyllrb.com/), served directly by [nginx](https://nginx.org/) – and somehow embed a commenting system. 

But none of the options I could think of really spoke to me. I could have embedded a separate app as an iframe, or I could have implemented it fully client-side. Neither felt nice or fun. 

One solution I didn't even think of would have been to use good old [server-side includes](https://nginx.org/en/docs/http/ngx_http_ssi_module.html). Amusingly, I got reminded of it when I read the excellent post [JSX over the wire](https://overreacted.io/jsx-over-the-wire/) by Dan Abramov, which advocates a very different solution, React Server Components. If I'd thought of that, I might have considered it. (That would of course probably had involved its own set of problems to solve, like how to think about caching etc.)  

In any case, I decided to go with a classic server app written in Java. I wanted to do it in a slow-refactoring style, keeping the existing functionality of the blog intact. So I started off by just putting together pieces that matched the Jekyll tech stack: 

- [Flexmark]