---
layout: post
title:  "Improving skagedal's oboy"
---
So far during 2023, I have blogged about two software projects. First a series of writing a habit tracker ([summarized here](/2023/01/29/habit-tracker-so-far.html)), and then a little investigation on Testcontainers ([starting here](/2023/01/30/test-containers-and-colima.html)). I plan more posts in both series, but right now I'd like to turn my attention to another project: this blog. 

Obviously, there is no tech blog like this that doesn't at some point start to discuss itself and that software that manages it. Sooner or later, you start writing your own custom blog software.

I don't plan to do that now, but I have before. I started my first blog at some point in the early 2000's and wrote a little tool to manage that I called "blogdans", named after the old Swedish [barn dance](https://sv.wikipedia.org/wiki/Logdans) custom. It was written in Python and stored contents in a PostgreSQL database running on [helgo.net](http://helgo.net/simon/), but I don't think it supported much more than posts with a plain title and body.

I later moved to use the [Blosxom](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Blosxom) software, and had both a blog that I think I called "Simon's blog" and a blog about my psychology studies that I was doing at the time. 

Later on in the 00's and 10's, I used Blogspot ([Tjohej, tjohej](http://tjohejtjohej.blogspot.com/) and various group blogs) and Wordpress ([skagedal](https://skagedal.wordpress.com/) and [processer](https://processer.wordpress.com/) and maybe some others) and I guess I also had a Live Journal at some point. 

Then in 2017, I felt the urge to write about some code, but if I remember correctly was unimpressed by Wordpress's support for syntax hightlighting and so on, and instead turned to publishing on Github using Jekyll, which was the style at the time.  A bit later, I moved that to it's own domain, which is what you're looking at now (unless I've moved it again). 

It would be fun to at some point bring all those old posts in under the same roof. But I'm not so sure there's much of value. 

Most of all, I'd like to improve some things about the current blog. I'm pretty happy with having a minimalist design, but there are some things I think would be nice to improve.

* I'd like to improve the styles I can use within the blog content. Blocks, callouts. Tables. Quotes.  
* Keeping series together. Maybe tags?
* Having a little blurb for each post
* Showing a nice little byline when the page is wide enough
* Make the main page of skagedal.tech be generated by same SSG
* Maybe Zola
* Maybe publish ActivityPub